world
or a
in Nigeria more tears of sorrow and more
demands for action
from others have the updated schoolgirls
as the country's president vows once
again
to conquer the terrorists responsible
good evening i'm glad I fall
and i'm judy woodruff also ahead this
Thursday growing calls from the American
Legion and others
buddy Alistair a Veterans Affairs
Secretary Eric Shinseki
amid allegations the BA here long wait
times
for care and Beth died from lack of
access to doctors
plus the cost of raising kids in the US
from daycare two nannies
our parenting series continues with a
look at the strains on the family
pocketbook
close to half market income goes to
childcare daycare was cause then I wanna
say 275 to 300
a week there was no way me I was gonna
be a whatever
for take those are just some other
stories we're covering on tonight's PBS
Newshour
are huge underground bomb in Syria
blasted a hotel into ruins today
killing up to 100 people it happened in
the key northern city of Aleppo
where Syrian government troops had been
using the hotel as their base
John sparks have independent television
news has this report
some say they're fighting a losing
battle
today however rebel fighters in Syria
showed there still a force to be
reckoned with in the heart of historic
Aleppo a prestigious hotel was destroyed
in a massive explosion
the opposition group Islamic Front took
the credit for the bomb blast
and these pictures I mean committee the
attack
much like so many other moments in this
conflict up has been well documented
year in February rebel combatants showed
off a new construction
a 250-foot long tunnel leading
to the Carlton Hotel on
mishap now we're putting the last
touches on it he says
and where one hundred percent sure if
the target
lead viewed from here's what's left of
the carton shirts at the stuff they use
23 tons of explosive
and local sources told this program at a
hundred soldiers were killed
on white and the government hasn't
commented on casualty figures
could have been higher than baser the
fight for Aleppo has been called the
mother
battles its for it Syria's biggest city
and both sides are determined to take it
the government targets rebel areas from
the air
with crude shrapnel Phil bombs by their
opponents resist down below
disease in a video posted yesterday from
Aleppo one fighter promised revenge
by Mike there will be big surprises soon
law we will liberate ACTA de sleep
still the front line in Aleppo has
barely shifted in the two years
between Booker T in Yemen US and other
Western embassies stepped up security
today
amid fears have new strikes by al Qaeda
Yemeni forces increase patrols
and station armored vehicles near the US
mission
it came as the Yemeni army said it
captured the militant stronghold in the
south
after an offensive that began 10 days
ago Amnesty International in the United
Nations
are accusing both sides in South Sudan
up crimes against humanity
separate reports today said government
troops and rebels
are guilty of mass killings sexual
slavery
and gang rapes meanwhile there was word
the rebel leader
has arrived in ethiopia for talks with
the South Sudanese President
separatist leaders in Ukraine pushed
ahead today with plans for an
independence vote
the referendum in the eastern regions
have done at scandal heart
is set for Sunday but Russian President
Vladimir Putin appeal yesterday for a
delay
today separatist councils rejected that
call
the leader and a network said the time
to vote is now
his yeah against the backdrop of today's
events
military actions that are happening in
the towns in the region against the
backdrop but the genocide that happen in
Odessa
the mood for holding the referendum is
only rising in the people
Internap postpone for any reason also
today Moscow said it added more US and
Canadian officials to a list banned from
visiting Russia
it did not name any names the newly
ousted Prime Minister of Thailand has
suffered a new blow
an anti-graft Commission founding work
Shana what
guilty of negligence in a widely
criticized rice subsidy program
just yesterday Shana water and nine
other cabinet ministers
were forced out of office when the tide
Constitutional Court
all they abuse their power security
forces in Venezuela arrested 243 young
activist in a pre-dawn crackdown on
protesters
soldiers staged raids on four tent camps
in Caracas in an effort to quell
demonstrations
against president Nicolas Maduro the
protesters are demanding his resignation
back in this country Wall Street mostly
struggle for direction today
the Dow Jones Industrial Average gained
32 points to close just short
16,000 551 but the Nasdaq fell 16 points
to close at 4051
and the S&P 500 lost to to finish it
1875 still to come on the news hour
nigeria's president vows the abducted
schoolgirls
will be found them the president's paper
health secretary
faces a Senate panel as house
republicans launch
another probe into the Benghazi attack
plus the high price a child care in the
US
how well our colleges preparing students
for life and work
and allegations that VA here long wait
times
for vets medical care
yield
Secretary of State John Kerry promised
today to do everything possible to help
rescue the abducted Nigerian schoolgirls
as the students families returned to the
site at the kidnapping
rakiya omaar independent television news
reports from Nigeria
old
three weeks home from an attack that's
provokes global revulsion
the mothers and relatives of Nigeria's
kidnapped girls
were taken back to the scene where the
family's nightmare began
the school into book where the girls
were taken for many
visiting this place was too much to bear
and yet despite all the International
offers of help
their torments and the ordeal being
suffered by their girls
shows no sign up in
in the capital A buda this crisis has
overshadowed an international economic
conference being held here
heads of state and global business
leaders marked a moment's silence
in on a of the kidnap schoolgirls all
eyes were on nigeria's president
criticize so much for not doing more he
said
Nigeria was facing the same kind of war
the West had had to deal with especially
this time
that as initial we are facing attack
of terrorist and fired by your
presidency a in Nigeria
at this time you have already support a
us to win the war against terror who
former Prime Minister Gordon Brown
called for action against Boca harm
weeks ago
he told me with so much lost time the
world had to face up to some hard truths
we have to extend the search for these
girls not be on Nigeria
and Cameroon Chad Tunisia and I feel
that they have been dispersed
across Africa and we may never hear from
again my message to the families is
we will not do everything in our power
even about slate we will do everything
in our power
to try to locate these girls time
is critical as the kidnapping of the
girls heads towards the fourth week
and the sense have urgency about taking
action rises by the day
a small American team of military and
law enforcement
and hostage negotiators is arriving in
Nigeria today to help the girls
for more on that effort I'm joined by US
Assistant Secretary of State
for African affairs Linda Thomas
Greenfield thank you for joining us
and thank you for having me get me here
best assessment as a
this evening how where the girls are
when I wish I could tell you where the
girls are
I don't think we have an answer to that
but I know that Nigerians don't have an
answer to that
they have been missing for more than
twenty four days
and I think the question that everyone
has is where
where are the girls there has been some
speculation that they have been split up
in different locations
we have heard that speculation that some
may have been
taken across the border and into
neighboring countries
are maybe in different locations inside
at Nigerian the forest and
also in some small villages but again
this is all
based on rumor and information that
we've not been able to confirm
everybody from your boss secretary as
state carry this morning to the
president United States have said
the US will do all it can do what can
the US do
we will do all we can do and the
president has instructed us to do that
we are starting by sending
a Marty at dimensional team and that
will include at the military civilians
individuals that can work with the
nigerians
on how to negotiate and how they can
approach sad
returning the girls without harming them
I know you're a diplomat rather than a
military person but this does this mean
we're not gonna have
any kind that military intervention in
this situation at this time there are no
plans
that this is a military intervention we
are sending
military advisors and to work
at the side that Nigerians and provided
by Sen
support to the Nigerians in their
efforts to retrieve
these girls about satellite and Ron
imagery that might help
us the nigerians have passed and this is
something that
I we are considered not drones but
that's our light amber sorry this
commercial
satellite imagery that that could be
available to assist in this effort
that is something that's being
considered you just mention that the
Nigerian to pass for that help its there
seem to be some delay
and the US offer up helping the
situation in Nigeria's
our willingness to accept it what was
that gap about
I'll we have not delayed in offering at
the Nigerian assistance
we started working with the Nigerian
government on providing
assists and several months ago I we have
had conversations with the
I military elements as well as the
national security adviser
I was out in Nigeria and December
which I know Rodriguez send other team
members from USC ID
we had some very productive discussions
with the nigerians
on how we might be able to assess summer
that assistance has already been there
provided to the Nigerians in terms of
helping them poor made
their own intelligence information are
giving them advice at based on ion
on experience and having dealt with
counterinsurgency zan
Iraq and Afghanistan so you're speaking
specifically about the cooperation on
the part of the US and the Nigerian
government to contain baccarat
yes it it there Boca ron has been a
problem for some time
so what progress has been made in that
joint effort
I as you know back in November the US
government
made a decision to sanction a book a ROM
and so they are on our are terrorists
list
and that gives ass the ability to
look at what kinda financing their they
have and also
to look at flows of money that they may
be have
may have going in in their direction I
but
this is a difficult to task
as they are basically a group of bandits
that are
hiding among among populations and it's
made it very difficult for the Nigerians
to
to capture them think it's fair to say
the US and other nations knew all that
about poker on before November so why
did the designation not happen until
their
I think we started working on it long
before november
itself long process to a
to make a designation and the efforts
that went into getting that that's
mentioned and
filing was completed in November you
have to explain to people who don't know
what you're talking about like me
what what this is the long process what
takes so long I
the actions are so obvious yeah we we
have to one thing we have to make sure
that we have a right
the people we're making the decision to
put on the list
I it has to go through a process where a
the Department of Treasury with the
Department of Justice
and all of the work that needed to go
into that process
was done and let us to come to the
decision to make the designation in
November
we are now where al Qaeda affiliate
cells are the one described them at work
not only in Nigeria but also
in Sudan and Somalia is there a
coordinated region all
I effort to try to break that up
I think regionally we have had number
discussions with the African Union and
with the regional players
across the continent to address
the scorcher terrorism that is taking
place in a number of locations
I'll whether it's in ass Somalia and
Kenya with OSHA Bob
I where the the a counter LR
a effort and also what baccarat man AQIM
and and al Qaeda I think that it has to
be a multi-regional
effort and we're certainly working with
our partners across Africa to address
this issue
do you feel that you're making progress
I think we're making slow progress but
there's still a lot about work to be
done
Linda Thomas green tea elicits so
insistent Secretary of State
for african affairs thank you so much
for helping us out
and thank you very much for having
the woman who will likely be the new
face of the health care law
testified today on capitol hill Sylvia
Mathews Burwell the president's budget
director
is mister Obama's nominee to replace
kathleen Sebelius
Secretary of Health and Human Services
rarely is anything on the Affordable
Care Act a bipartisan affair anymore in
congress
but Burwell was well received by members
on both sides of the aisle
as burl you have a reputation
for competence and I would respectfully
suggest
you're gonna need it that warning
notwithstanding republicans like lamar
alexander
mostly used the hearing to take a
knotted Burwell but if the health care
law
republicans would like to repair the
damage that Obamacare has done we'd like
to prevent future damage as responsibly
and rapidly as we can
sick but Burwell did not concede that
point instead in her opening statement
she argued the effect that the law have
been positive was wrong the department's
work to ensure
accessible affordable quality health
care through the implementation of the
Affordable Care Act
is making a difference in the lives our
families and our communities
while strengthening the economy if
confirmed Burwell would succeed kathleen
Sebelius
who announced her resignation last month
lead republicans roundly criticized her
for the botched rollout of the federal
online insurance exchange last fall
today South Carolina Republican Tim
Scott Press Burwell on whether
she'd be an independent voice are I'd
ask you simply
as secretary of HHS will you fight be
Health and Human Services Secretary for
the american people or will you be as
your predecessor has been the ambassador
of Obamacare
I'm here to serve the american people
I'm part of the president's
administration I'm honored to be
appointed
person former assessor the American
people I believe it
the president and his policies are
aligned with that will work
but I am here to serve the american
people that line of questioning drew a
strong rebuke from
Iowa Democrat Tom Harkin the chair the
committee
it is my my opinion
based upon the years a work with
kathleen Sebelius Secretary earliest
that she performed her job admirably and
she was
a responsible a and attended
Secretary of Health and Human Services
and carried out
the law as we rode Democrats also touted
benefits at the law
and kinetic its Chris Murphy zeroed in
on republican governors who are locked
in embracing key provisions
such as expanding Medicaid what are the
ways in which we can work in a flexible
manner with the state's
as they may be wake up to the reality
have how well the implementation is
going after the initial botched rollout
where the ways in which we can work with
some other states that haven't done
things like connecticut at
try to make this work im all 50 states
rather than just in a handful
that have set up their own exchanges I
think there are two things it does come
back to the point about the flexibility
is one of the points and I think what's
important is to send the signal that
folks are willing to have the
conversations as I said it's important
if their fundamental principles started
late does in terms of the change you
trying to get
but be willing to have the conversations
and hear the ideas
with their wells answers generally seem
to go down well
some republicans even spoke of her
reputation for competence
before taking over at the office of
management and budget she held
leadership positions with the Walmart
Foundation and the Gates Foundation
she also served in the Clinton
administration at the national economic
council
Richard burr of North Carolina cited
that background
saying he plans to support the
nomination it's because she didn't come
with the single experience
dead would make urban sector she comes
with a portfolio
%uh experience that would make her a
tremendous asset addressing some of the
challenges that that agents specific
that agency specifically
and uniquely has thank Burwell also got
an outside boost when
America's health insurance plans and
industry trade group
issued a statement calling her uniquely
qualified
she still faces a separate confirmation
hearing before the Senate Finance
Committee
that hearing has not yet been scheduled
the reporter on that story of course was
hari Sreenivasan
as Rocky is there a lot of health care
that God has been a new report says
the federal exchange was a bargain
compared to the state-run marketplace's
which spent twice as much per enrollee
that stories on our rundown
now to the continued fallout in
controversy over the attacks on the
American consulate in Benghazi Libya
two years ago four Americans including
ambassador
were killed in Benghazi and republicans
argue there are on answer questions
about what more could have been done to
prevent the deaths and the white house's
role in the aftermath
the house of representatives today moved
to form a special committee
to investigate led by South Carolina
Republican congressman trade County
a former prosecutor democratic
congressman Elijah Cummings of Maryland
said it was all about politics but House
Speaker John bainer argue there are
valid questions to pursue
over the administration's actions we're
here to consider a resolution
too great another participant committee
to investigate what the speaker and and
525 chairman
have already been investigating
with all drew respect
if the republicans want to fix the
problems would be a partisan
investigation need more than just
a new chairman avatar act tremendous
respect for mister gallery
and i'm glad that he said the
fundraising should not be done
on the deaths have these four people and
I hope that the republican conference
family agree with that we are better
than the Act
last week a line was crossed into places
first came to light that the white house
did more to obscure what happened
and why the mock we were led
to believe sakib we now know that the
administration
a defied a formal congressional subpoena
our committee sought the full truth
and the administration tried to make
sure that they wouldn't find it
which means they tried to prevent the
American people from finding the truth
as well with us now is congressional
reporter Robert koster
the washington post he joins us from
capitol hill robber koster welcome
back to the news hour it's been two
years since Ben Ghazi almost
will be in September the speaker earlier
was against
a new investigation what has caused him
to change his mind
there was a really serve recent
documents by procured by judicial Watch
a conservative group
and these are documents including new
emails about how the white house
messaged the attacks a right in the
immediate aftermath
and and the release of these emails a
really has angered house republicans
here on capitol hill
and it has spurred them to create the
select committee so after all the in
that we know there were four
investigations underway there been a lot
of documents released
so just in the release of these emails
that's what change the speakers Mon
it's not only that I think that is the
main factor in that is the factor
speaker banner has cited but there also
is a political element to it
other conservative wing of the
Republican Party the GOP base
they have been very frustrated about the
administration's handling
up the attacks for a long time and I
headed the midterm elections Republican
leadership
there they are paying attention to the
base in the a.m the desires are those
backbench conservative
were also eager to have the Select
Committee what is the white house what
is the administration saying in response
to the
to this I what the republicans are
saying
smells like something fishy was
happening democrats both at the White
House and in Congress
are skeptical this republican initiative
Nancy Pelosi the Democratic leader in
the house
has said I the democrats may even
boycott the select committee that will
make that decision tomorrow when they
meet privately at the Capitol
in at the white house %uh the democrats
there believe
that they've already been investigations
into the Intelligence Committee on the
Oversight Committee in the Foreign
Affairs Committee
and elsewhere and I think that's enough
why is only the house pursuing this
investigation one of the senate
will simply now the house is dominated
by Republicans and that the democrats
Senate is not and I think the house it
has always special with the oversight
committee in the house
they have really bad been delving into
this issue for a long time it animates
the Republican Party
and they feel it now because there is
such a divided Congress
there's not much chance a bipartisan
deals and fiscal matters
house republicans broadly speaking are
turning to oversight looking into Ben
Ghazi
looking into the Internal Revenue
Service in the administration's handling
at that
that's the focus right now for the GOP
you were saying I rubber casa not much
a chance serves substantive legislation
I mean do you mean that literally that
there's not much that's going to be
happening this year
that's right we're really in a in a
phase now what we move toward summer
campaign in the August recess
and knees over Sands oversight and there
will be much time even for the Select
Committee
to do much work before the election
because %uh the August recess
you're looking at republicans position
in themselves
looking at Ben Ghazi and trying to
underscore before november
reminding voters at this is at the top
of their list in terms of issues
and as you alluded the democrats have a
tough decision to make about whether or
not to participate
in this special committee are they are
divided I get
it is it there's been a an interesting
term today
on capitol well-spoken speaking to some
house democrats
and initially were very reluctant to
participate in the Select Committee
but now because they know secretary
former Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton
is likely to be called they now want to
perhaps be on the committee to act as
defenders former she is the party's
about leading contender for the 2016
presidential
campaign and if she is called they want
to be in that room
robber cuz I also want to ask about want
something else we just heard congressman
Cummings mention that is the fact that
some Republicans are using the banned
GoDaddy a
allegations to raise money for the party
where does that stand I know that
congressman Galletti who's gonna be the
chairman of this committee said he
thought it was
inappropriate but then speaker bainer
today
declined to say that its it that it's
wrong so what what's the thinking on
that
this is a case study and how the select
committee is complicated
politically alright Traeger Audi a
former a federal prosecutor from South
Carolina is chairing the Select
Committee
speaker bainer they're trying to present
a sober I'll look for the republicans in
the house
a seriousness to this entire process yet
almost immediately
but the NRCC the campaign arm at the
house GOP started a fund raiser offer
this entire initiative
and so you have sober on one hand and
fundraising and political on the other
it can be hard bounce republicans to
make and speaker banner today in a press
conference did not address the
fundraising from the NRCC related to Ben
Ghazi
I and i think that is a a testament to
his his ability to his inability to
grapple with that tension
is is there is this something the
republicans believe they can
raise money offer well I think they have
not not
only can they but they have for quite
some time II
spent a lot on out on the campaign trail
and when I talk to republican
base voters tea party conservatives Ben
Ghazi more than jobs it seems
more than my any other issue is at the
top of their lists are concerned
they really believe the Obama
administration is out of line and how it
handled the response to these attacks
and they want the pressure in the
leadership day in and day out calls
emails eccentric
to go in going into it more and just
quickly more than health care
even though I mean I think Obamacare
ahead 20-14 is certainly
at the top at that same list but I it
Obamacare
and Ben Ghazi when I'm out on the trail
that's what I hear is a reporter
I think the republican leadership would
echo that if you had a conversation with
them
Robert cost of the washington post we
thank you thank you
the cost and affordability a good child
care is the focus of the next
installment in our series parenting now
it's a major concern for families
throughout the country and in different
ways
it cuts across lines a class and then
come the news are at: économiques
correspondent paul solomon has the story
part of his reporting making sense %uh
financial news
we money Point Baltimore teacher
Danielle spiro gave birth to her
daughter
evil last year she had to quit her job
there was no way we I was gonna be a
whatever for
daycare Tiffany berard worked at Walmart
in Laurel Maryland
when she had her second daughter out
made twelve thousand for the whole year
and I'm daycare was cause then I wanna
say 275 to 300
a week just for the newborn it that's
more than she was earning
in Alexandria Virginia mother-of-two
lisa boyle and her husband can make the
payments
still close to half the market income
goes to childcare
depending on where you live in America
these days
full-time infant care can run to twenty
four thousand dollars a year
the net prague a heads the advocacy
group childcare aware
in most regions of the country a child
care is the most expensive
apart in the family's budget in most
places
infant here now costs more than state
college tuition
it's a cost rising as much as eight
times faster than family income in some
places
and it presents a sordid generational
catch-22
your kids figured it needed Vantage is
like quality
in Fenton and day care well to prosper
in school and the workplace
but with stagnant wages you can't afford
them
and yet says Fraga the research
is unequivocal we know that during the
first couple have years of life
the and brain is growing at a very rapid
rate
and that's where we really should be
putting investment President Obama
called for universal preschool in this
year's State of the Union address
one of the best investments we can make
in a child's life
is high-quality early education but so
far
nothing's happened and parents like
Danielle spiro
are still on their own going begin
Spyros teacher's salary wasn't enough to
cover the cost of caring for her
daughter
I was after taxes bring home about five
hundred dollars a week
and down with our mortgage and
everything out there just wasn't going
to work
perches spiro is the family's primary
earner
her husband is a student after she
joined her mom's consulting for
she hired a nanny she loves but even on
her seventy thousand dollars salary
can only afford part-time to bridge the
gap
command she put her 1-year-old in the
cheapest home daycare she could find
it proved a poor alternative the TV was
on mister the day
it just wasn't an ideal situation but I
didn't really have very many choices
spiro pulled her out and now watches her
daughter herself when the nanny is in
there
I am waking up with her as somewhere
between 5:30 and six in the morning
and I'm with her all day and I A put her
to bed around 6:30 7 o'clock at night
eat clean house I get a little on Jan
hand and start my work sometimes she
finishes at one in the morning
for later Tiffany Borough Road cut back
from full-time work two weekends
to save on child care when her daughter
amelia came along
she was one in daycare and I am it was
really expensive and it was taken the
majority of
my paycheck in cinema has been shipped
paycheck I didn't wanna be a stay at
home mom
now was forced to basically take the
part time position and forced to take a
media out-of-date care
which perot word believed was benefiting
the baby
mainly with soft skills this plays a big
role in their
socialize interacting with other kids in
fact day care costs are driving more
mothers to opt out altogether
almost one-third now stay at home
the most in more than two decades women
girl 38 the
Crystal City children center costs over
twenty thousand dollars a year for a
full-time infant care
hi but typical in the wealthy DC suburbs
for high-quality care however there's
little margin between costs and revenues
says director llewellyn Matthews people
have three teachers and their
and you have only nine children so if
you look at the tuition from nine
children
to pay three teachers plus the overhead
light he rent it's very very small
by pay your average is barely sixteen
dollars an hour
more but if the center paid more i'd
have to increase my tuition
lisa boyle the center's assistant
director understands the whipsaw better
than most
the jack she uses almost all her salary
to pay for her two children to come here
even though she gets a discount for
3-year-old son
in the end I work to earn about a
hundred dollars
every weekend well can swing it because
her husband works too
plus she's convinced it's an important
investment
when looking at alternatives that were
cheaper it was always
you know were quality so it's that the
choice that we've made
and to invest in our children's
education and that 023
he just can't get those years back it
was another one of those decisions where
we went back and forth
and you know eventually too baby when
hunter
single moms like Paula Wilson a box and
Hill Maryland
don't have such choices which she simply
can't afford a place like Crystal City
everything is on all I don't have a
someone to
you know shared a bills where so I had
to make sure I'm
you know plan everything out to it full
Wilson a hotel maid sensor
three-year-old Daniel to a family-run
daycare she likes and can just afford
but it's twenty minutes away and she
can't afford
a car every day have to figure out how
day is going to get to daycare
a minority have clothes and daycares in
that area but they're way too expensive
all so wilson asks friends and family to
help with transportation
there are child care subsidies available
but
she doesn't qualify so you make
seventeen dollars our
you must be able to afford it but they
don't look at the fact that sometimes
the hotel is slowing never know
weighing is going to be slow meanwhile
Tiffany Borough Road
recently lost her job at Walmart before
we were struggling now we have to
struggle even more
to make is me we need the income so we
can make sure that we have read
how we can make sure that we have food
and clothing for the children
for such families infant and child care
are luxuries but says lynette Fraga
it's also an economic and educational
imperative families
have to work and when they have to work
they need quality settings to put their
children
n on to be cared and nurtured and
developed for later school success open
and close
unfortunately these are quality settings
that a great many Americans just can't
afford
even parents who work full-time often
can't afford backup childcare
read the story of a single mom who feels
caught between the
needing to care for her kids when
they're not at school and climbing the
ladder at work
that's on making sense
now to what different look at the cost
of kids the ever-rising price tags for
college
how do you assess the value of one's
degree and have higher education overall
as a graduate moves on in life many
studies have looked at job placement in
income as a key metric
but a new study measures it differently
focusing on whether a graduate has a
good life in terms of
well-being satisfaction and engagement
in a career
the report comes from a survey of more
than 30,000 graduate
in all 50 states it was done by gallup
in partnership with Purdue University
and the Lumina Foundation earlier this
week I spoke with the president Purdue
also the former governor Indiana mitch
Daniels
and for the record the Lumina Foundation
is a funder the NewsHour
mitch Daniels welcome to the NewsHour
thanks for me. so why did you want to
undertake this kind of study
started as us at purdue has won
University feeling we should be
accountable we wanted to know with some
rigor an authority how r grains were
doing
and for so that we can report at the
potential future students
and secondly so maybe we could learn
things that would help us become better
than I found the folks at gallup
with twenty or thirty years of research
in this area we're very interested in
something broader in
that was today so what it one of the
most interesting findings here
is that when you look at what's happened
to graduates and this is
the survey was across the country it
didn't matter
so much whether they went to a private
college or a public college
I or or even how selective
the school was in determining what kinda
life they had afterwards
tell us about that probably one of the
most surprising lot a surprise in your
hood
maybe nothing surpasses that no
statistically significant difference as
you just said between public and private
so-called elite and and
up larger schools I like ours turns out
that what matters a overwhelmingly is
not where you went to school but
how you went and how the school approach
the process your education
and what it what did you mean by that
how did you measure how
how engage up folks were when
again gallup has decades and tens of
millions have interviews and named aid
by now have a very good method for dis
determining well-being in all its
domains is really important judy
to know that we were yes we were
interested in how our graduates are
graduate all graduates were doing
materially where they employ them where
they are earning a good
living and all that but also there's
physical well-being and social
and and in the sense that engagement
with work in community
and that's really what we've always said
college
should produce people who thrive in all
those
areas and turns out that what really
matters is
did at least one professor shows
specific interest in you and give you
coaching in
mentoring did you have a work experience
and internship some sort of
experiential learning ago that went
along with your classroom learning these
are the kinda lessons that
we all can make our school and many
others better now the implication is
that
that a lot of people been measuring the
wrong things are thinking about the
wrong things
when they pick a school or think about
the school they went yeah it sure is an
implication especially when the spread
of costs across the schools which
we now know or not producing better
outcomes
is so gigantic and not produce were land
grant school we were put there to
along with our sister schools to throw
open the gates at higher education
beyond the elites
a this country and when we got it be
serious about it
but now we know that if we can do that
affordably for students so they can
have just as good an education on the
other end do you think the results mitch
Daniels about other survey like this
wall will make other schools feel more
comfortable
about not having to keep a raising costs
and keep
paying evermore for new buildings a
faculty and so on
I think that snow school should have
gotten the the memo about that already
you're hearing it
the in the in perfectly legitimate
criticism
the in public discourse this year the
highest percentage a record percentage a
freshman
past over their first choice school for
a second or third choice
almost always on the basis of cost and
so
I think that many the excesses that you
just mentioned
really a run their course so what's the
main message that you would want folks
to take away
from this in young people and their
parents who were thinking about
the next several years go to school
prepared
to to drawn the lessons here too the
search out the experiential
opportunities as well as complete
traditional classroom
to go to school with some a reputation
for the engagement
faculty closely in the teaching and
pay pay close attention to cost because
a
very likely you're not buying greater
quality for the higher
sticker price you're being charged and
one other thing you mentioned that with
the survey also
found that those graduates who carry a
lot of student debt when they leave that
can very much affect what they do right
I think we've all
this sense that student that was a big
big problem
the survey tells us that it's an even
bigger problem than we thought
that in a linear fashion the more data
student leaves with even if it's not
that much by today's standards it brings
down their so-called well-being across
all these dimensions financial social
health
status and so forth and another
very troublesome finding them more debt
you have the less likely Arctic ever
start a business so that's
that's bad at the individual level on
bad societal Ian economically
mitch Daniels president at Purdue
University thinking about
the ways people ought to think about at
the school
they choose to go to thank you hun
thinking that
veteran affairs secretary Eric Shinseki
is pushing back against calls
for him to resign this comes after
allegations that dozens of patients have
died
because the delay treatment added agency
hospital
jeffrey Brown reports all those in favor
the motion to issue the Spain will say I
I all those opposed no
the house Veterans Affairs Committee
voted overwhelmingly this morning
to subpoena communications between
Veterans Affairs Secretary Eric Shinseki
and his colleagues
the focus allegations that employees at
VA facilities in Phoenix Arizona
and Fort Collins Colorado falsified
records on delays in treating patients
a retired doctor in Phoenix would work
to the hospital
came forward with allegations it up to
4tb a patient
died while awaiting care on Monday the
head of the nation's largest veterans
group the American Legion
called for Shin sexys resignation there
needs to be a change
and that change me so occur at the top
the administration needs to take steps
now is long overdue they have they
should have taken steps
months ago keys time three Republican
senators including John Cornyn of Texas
quickly join that called on the
president needs to find a new leader
do like leaders organization how to the
wilderness
and back to providing the service that
are better in scissor but House Speaker
John Boehner said today the real
priority is making it easier fishing
sexyy to fire people
I'm not ready to to join though the
course a people calling for him
to step down other problems a at the VA
are systemic
and I don't believes that the just
change in some other top he's going to
actually get
to the solutions that many of us were
looking for Democrats have generally
defended the secretary
while demanding improvements in care for
the nine million people in the VA
medical system
for his part in Sec Ian says she wants
TEP down
he told the Wall Street Journal
yesterday I serve at the pleasure of the
President
I sign on to make some changes I have
work to do
the VA inspector general is now
investigating the allegations are false
applying records
and white House spokesman Jay Carney
says President Obama is standing by the
Secretary
the president remains confident in
secretary Shin sexys
ability to lead the department to take
appropriate action
based on the ideas findings ending those
findings
chance ekie has now ordered a nationwide
review love access to care
all be a clinton's we invited veterans
affairs secretary Shinseki to appear on
tonight's program he declined
so to tell us more about what happened
in Phoenix and the wider implications
we turn to Associated Press reporter
Brian skoloff
and Philip Carter he's a senior fellow
with the Center for a New American
Security
is a former army officer who writes
often on issues involving veterans
Ryan's girl so let me start with you
tell us more first about the specific
allegations here
VA was falsifying records have
appointments with patients
yeah it does the allegations on way to
doctor who retired longtime physician
with the VA after about twenty years a
service retired in December
and then came public with these
allegations that I
administration at the VA hospital
instructed staff to keep this
secret waiting list to hide wait times
are
sometimes patience for waiting six to
nine months to get in there
but the wait list was showing that they
were getting appointments within
two weeks he also claims because at this
weight Leicester
up to forty patients may have died while
awaiting this care
well explain that Brian because the
alligators doesn't the it's not
necessarily the forty people died
because they weren't seen but they would
that they died during that waiting time
exactly and we also have to make make
perfectly clear here that
these are all still allegations as you
noted the inspector general's office has
investigators here in Phoenix poring
over records interviewing staff
trying to get to the truth right now
what we have is this doctor and two
other former be employees making this
claimed
and your Jackley correct i mean the the
claims are that up to 40 patients may
have died while awaiting care
but you know first evolved be a
administration here in Phoenix deny any
these allegations but they also point
out that
if there were doubts while patients were
waiting doctors appointments
they may work very well may could have
happened from a heart attack or a car
accident things unrelated to the care
that they were seeking so
again by on the inspector general's down
here we'll have to wait to see what the
probe turned up
I will tho Carter there there is a large
larger context you're right the VA has
been under pressure and criticized for
a systemic problems and not keeping up
with demand
the wars we've been fighting that's
right these allegations strike a chord
because even though there's widespread
patient satisfaction with the VA's
massive hospital system
there also repeated allegations like
this and in fact the Government
Accountability Office the j.o
substantiated many of these a couple
years ago with a series of reports on
how
unreliable the VA's wait time
systems were and that's been a known
problem within the VA
that even though they've known about it
they've not fixed in the years well
and in fact presumably it is that very
thing that may have caused the pressure
in Phoenix and other places too to
falsified the documents I sOooo
that sparked in part of it is also the
potential linkage between performance
incentives
and wat time said is that the reported
wait times are the targets for those
wait times
are part of the employment contracts for
certain VA officials
they're also very visible metres up
success for VA medical centers
and there's an allegation at least that
VA personnel may have
the tweak the stats in order to look
better on those measures
so we have the allegations in Phoenix
Fort Collins
are you here is is it look like
going to be hearing about this and other
places as well these practices there are
also reports coming out of Austin
and San Antonio yet you have to remember
the VA's a massive health care system
151 hospitals
800-plus clinics and so if these
conditions existed at the Phoenix center
which I should say is also home to the
second largest veterans community the
country they may exist in other large
facilities or small facilities to it is
a speaker better said
most likely a systemic issue well Brian
skoloff AE
you said that there in phoenix the VA
people at the hospital have denied
these allegations tell us a little bit
more about the reaction so far
well yeah I mean I good point was raised
there need these allegations
if they are very very serious and and
they doctor foot the
for be a ploy came out with them first
reclaims exactly what your guests just
said that
the reason the administrators were
having these wait times a
fabricated whether that their pad their
pockets with the with bonus checks am
director Sharon how many as a director
the VA health care system here in
Phoenix
prior to it being her being placed on
administrative leave
last week told made that cheap flat-out
denies this
she makes roughly 169 170 thousand
dollars a year for bonus last year was
about ninety three hundred dollars
I you know chichi scoffs at the notion
that she would
sit back and watch veterans died to make
an extra nine thousand dollars a in
in bonus money again though these are
all allegations but if proven true
they're they're very serious allegations
butts that the cheaper staff and the
hospital administrator be manly denied
that
any secret waiting list was created that
the ever told staff to create the seeker
waiting list
and that staff is really just confused
with the changeover from
paperwork actual paperwork to an
electronic waiting list
but again you know our at this point
it's a he said she said Intel a mess
Gators get to the truth
wealth or carter at the national level
though there is a lot of pressure now on
a I'm generations Aki there's an awful
lot of pressure and a lot of folks are
analogize in this now to the water read
scandal from six years ago where
their reports I love terrible living
conditions at the Walter Reed Army
Medical Center
which is not a VA facility and those led
to the downfall of the Army's medical
leadership as a result
are but folks are trying to figure out
here in washington where did you fix
responsibility within the chain of
command is it at the secretary level
is it below that at the regional level
the hospital level
are down below and I think that there's
a a a consensus building at least
and speaker painters comments illustrate
that to wait for the investigation
before we fix accountability for these
issues
now G secretary Shinseki announced this
face to face
Rd right today yesterday at all all the
facilities across the country
do we know what that will entail do we
know how long it will take
no we don't know the details of that we
do know that it was announced
earlier in April arm and that that was
part of the effort to you
understand how much of an issue this is
throughout the VA's massive health care
system
secretary Shinseki trying to get ahead
of the story as much as possible
while also fighting the perception that
he's not doing enough Brian skoloff do
you have any more on that on how that's
going to work there in phoenix
well I mean it could be weeks down here
trying to get to the truth of things but
you know a good point was raised there
is it that it is no secret
that the BA is overwhelmed with veteran
seeking care either from
previous wars more recent wars there are
lot of veterans even care
and and there really a swarming this
hospital some you look the VA is already
acknowledged that twenty-three patients
in recent years
had died due to delayed care so so
there's no there there is no secret that
there is an issue with the late care the
allegations made here in Phoenix though
are very serious
that there was a cover-up in order for
these administrators to make money and
and get bonus checks am
so I I guess we'll wait and see but I
but again as our guest noted
there's no secret that the VA has a
master's it needs to deal with
I Brian skoloff Phil Carter thank you
both very much
Inc thank you
again the major developments at the day
nigeria's president pledged to find more
than 270 schoolgirls
kidnapped by Islamist militant militants
rebels in Syria set off a huge bomb in a
lot below that level the hotel
used by government militia report set up
to a hundred people were killed
and the US House voted to set up a
select committee
to investigate the 2012 attacks on
American diplomats
in Benghazi Libya Republicans push the
idea
it was unclear at democrats will take
part on the news hour online right now
how for Ricoh therapists are helping
some soldiers
with PTSD service dogs are being used to
keep patients from missing their
mental health appointments at some
military installations
and the idea is gaining support you can
read our report
on the run down all that and more is on
our website newshour dot PBS .org
and Aston is out for tonight on Friday
russia's President Putin heads to crimea
and a look at whether american kids are
overprotected oMG when I fall and i'm
judy woodruff will see you
online and again right here tomorrow
evening with mark shields and David
Brooks among others
for all of us here at the PBS Newshour
thank you and goodnight